.TH GIT-ENV 1 "2026-06-30" "git-env" "Git Manual"
.SH NAME
git-env \- sync environment files across linked git worktrees
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B git env
.RI [ --porcelain ]
.I subcommand
.RI [ args ...]
.br
.B git env --version
.br
.B git env --help
.br
.B git env help
.RI [ subcommand ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B git env
is a git extension that manages environment files (initially
.IR .env )
across linked worktrees created by
.BR "git worktree add" .
Environment files are typically gitignored, so they don't follow a worktree
the way tracked files do; this tool copies them across so a new worktree
isn't missing the secrets and local config the primary worktree has.
.PP
.B git env
is a thin dispatcher: it resolves
.B "git env"
.I subcommand
to a
.B git-env-\fIsubcommand\fR
executable, the same mechanism git itself uses for its own subcommands.
This keeps the door open for new subcommands, including third-party ones,
without changing the dispatcher.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B sync
Copy environment files from the primary worktree into the current linked
worktree. See
.BR git-env-sync (1)
for the full description of flags, conflict handling, and exit codes.
.PP
The following subcommand names are reserved for future official use and
will refuse to run with a usage error if invoked:
.BR push ", " diff ", " status ", " list ", " edit ", " check .
This is so a third-party
.B git-env-status
script written today won't silently conflict with an official subcommand
added later.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --version
Print the installed version of
.BR git-env .
Only valid before a subcommand, so it cannot clash with a subcommand's own
.B -v
/
.B --verbose
flag.
.TP
.BR --help
Print short usage and exit.
.TP
.B --porcelain
Reserved for a future machine-readable output mode. Not implemented in
this version: passing it is a usage error (exit code 3) rather than being
silently ignored, so scripts don't depend on output that hasn't been
specified yet.
.SH "GIT HELP INTEGRATION"
.B git help env
opens this manpage via
.BR man (1),
which is why the installed filename must be exactly
.IR git-env.1 .
.SH "EXIT CODES"
.TS
tab(:);
l l.
0:success
1:usage-dependent (see subcommand manpage)
2:refused to run (not a git worktree, bare repo, or other precondition failure)
3:usage error (bad flag, unknown or reserved subcommand)
4:I/O error
.TE
.PP
These codes are part of the command's contract across all subcommands;
scripts may rely on them.
.SH LIMITATIONS
Submodules are not traversed: environment files inside a submodule are
never synced, and
.B git-env
assumes a single primary worktree per invocation. Bare repositories are
detected and rejected.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR git-env-sync (1),
.BR git (1),
.BR git-worktree (1)
