.TH GIT-ENV-SYNC 1 "2026-06-30" "git-env" "Git Manual"
.SH NAME
git-env-sync \- copy environment files from the primary worktree into the current linked worktree
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B git env sync
.RB [ -n | --dry-run ]
.RB [ -f | --force ]
.RB [ -v | --verbose ]
.RB [ -q | --quiet ]
.RB [ --pattern
.IR glob ]\fR...
.RB [ --path
.IR subdir ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B git env sync
copies environment files (default:
.I .env
and
.IR .env.* )
from the
.B primary worktree
into the
.B current linked worktree
, preserving the relative path of each file and its mode bits (notably the
executable bit, since some
.I .envrc
files are executable). The sync is strictly one-way, primary to linked; a
hypothetical
.B git env push
in the other direction is not implemented.
.PP
The primary worktree is the one whose
.I .git
is a directory \(em the original clone. The current worktree's
.I .git
is a file pointing at
.IR .git/worktrees/ <name>/
inside the primary. Git itself is used to find both: see
.B REPOSITORY DETECTION
below.
.PP
.B git env sync
must be run from a linked worktree. Running it from the primary worktree,
from outside any git repository, or from a bare repository all refuse to
run with exit code 2.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -n ", " --dry-run
Print the actions that would be taken, but change nothing on disk. Exits 0
if the linked worktree is already up to date, or 1 if changes are pending.
.TP
.BR -f ", " --force
Overwrite local files even when they differ from the primary. Without
this flag, a differing destination file is a conflict: it is skipped, a
warning is printed, and the run exits 1 for that file (see
.B CONFLICT HANDLING
below). Also bypasses the safety check that refuses to run when the
primary has uncommitted changes to tracked env files.
.TP
.BR -v ", " --verbose
Print every file considered, including ones that are skipped (already
in sync, excluded, too large, a symlink, etc).
.TP
.BR -q ", " --quiet
Suppress non-error output. Errors still go to stderr.
.B --verbose
and
.B --quiet
are mutually exclusive; combining them is a usage error (exit 3).
.TP
.BI --pattern\  glob
Override the configured patterns for this run only. Repeatable; each
occurrence adds one glob. Does not consult
.B env.sync.patterns
or the
.I .envsync
file when given.
.TP
.BI --path\  subdir
Restrict the sync to files under
.I subdir
of the worktree, instead of the whole worktree.
.SH "REPOSITORY DETECTION"
.IP 1. 4
Run
.B "git rev-parse --is-inside-work-tree" .
If false or the command errors, refuse with exit 2: "not inside a git
worktree".
.IP 2. 4
Run
.B "git rev-parse --is-bare-repository" .
If true, refuse with exit 2: "bare repositories are not supported".
.IP 3. 4
Compare
.B "git rev-parse --git-dir"
and
.B "git rev-parse --git-common-dir" .
If they resolve to the same path, the current directory
.B is
the primary worktree, not a linked one, and the run refuses with exit 2,
naming the primary's path.
.IP 4. 4
The primary worktree root is the parent directory of the common git dir.
.SH "FILE DISCOVERY"
The primary worktree is walked, matching files against the configured
patterns.
.I .gitignore
is deliberately
.B not
respected, since environment files are typically gitignored \(em that's
the reason this tool exists. A dedicated
.I .envsyncignore
file (gitignore syntax) at the primary root excludes paths regardless of
pattern matches.
.PP
Symlinks are skipped by default; set
.B env.sync.followSymlinks
to follow them. Files larger than
.B env.sync.maxFileSize
(default 1 MiB) are skipped with a warning, since a large match usually
means a misconfigured pattern rather than a legitimate env file.
.PP
.B Submodules are not traversed.
Environment files inside a submodule are never synced by this command.
.SH "COPY SEMANTICS"
Each file is written to
.IR <dest>.envsync.tmp
and then renamed over the real destination, so a sync that is interrupted
midway never leaves a partially-written env file in place. Mode bits are
preserved; modification time is not \(em the destination's mtime reflects
when it was synced, which makes staleness visible. Nothing is ever written
outside the current worktree root, even if a pattern or a followed
symlink would otherwise resolve there.
.SH "CONFLICT HANDLING"
A conflict is a destination file that already exists and differs from the
source. Resolution depends on the destination's state and the flags
given:
.IP \(bu 2
Destination does not exist: copied.
.IP \(bu 2
Destination is byte-identical to the source: skipped silently.
.IP \(bu 2
Destination differs from the source, no
.BR --force :
skipped with a warning and a one-line diff summary (e.g. "3 lines
differ"); the run's exit code becomes 1; the user is told to re-run with
.B --force
or resolve the file manually.
.IP \(bu 2
Destination differs from the source,
.B --force
given: the destination is overwritten unconditionally. If
.B env.sync.backup
is true (the default), the previous content is saved to
.I <dest>.envsync.bak
first \(em a single backup slot, overwritten on each subsequent forced
sync, so one mistake is always recoverable but old backups don't pile up.
.SH "SAFETY RAILS"
The run refuses (exit 2) if the primary worktree has uncommitted changes
to
.B tracked
files matching the env patterns, unless
.B --force
is given. This guards against propagating a half-edited tracked template.
.PP
The run also refuses if
.B $PWD
is not within the current worktree, as a guard against unusual
invocations, and never writes outside the current worktree root.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Settings are read with
.BR "git config" ,
which applies the usual precedence: system, then global, then local, then
worktree config. Per-repo overrides belong in the primary's
.IR .git/config ;
per-worktree overrides in the worktree's own config.
.PP
.TS
tab(:);
l l l l.
Key:Type:Default:Meaning
_
env.sync.patterns:multi-value:.env, .env.*:Globs to sync; multi-value so values can be appended, not just replaced
env.sync.exclude:multi-value:.env.example, .env.sample, .env.template:Patterns never synced (committed templates)
env.sync.followSymlinks:bool:false:Follow symlinks instead of skipping them
env.sync.maxFileSize:int (bytes):1048576:Files larger than this are skipped with a warning
env.sync.onConflict:enum:skip:One of skip, overwrite, prompt
env.sync.backup:bool:true:Whether --force writes a .envsync.bak backup
.TE
.PP
An optional
.I .envsync
file at the primary worktree root pins patterns into version control for
team consistency. It is parsed as
.I key=value
lines, using the same keys as above but without the
.B env.sync.
prefix; lines starting with
.B #
and blank lines are ignored. Git config always takes precedence over
.I .envsync
when both set the same key, and
.I .envsync
takes precedence over the built-in default.
.SH "EXIT CODES"
.TS
tab(:);
l l.
0:success, or dry-run with no changes pending
1:sync completed but one or more files had conflicts that were skipped
2:refused to run (in the primary worktree, not a git repo, bare repo, dirty tracked env files)
3:usage error (bad flag, e.g. --verbose with --quiet)
4:I/O error while copying a file
.TE
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Preview what a sync would do without changing anything:
.B git env sync --dry-run
.TP
Sync only files under
.IR apps/web :
.B git env sync --path apps/web
.TP
Force-overwrite local files, keeping a backup of what was there:
.B git env sync --force
.TP
Sync an extra pattern not covered by configuration:
.B git env sync --pattern '*.env.local'
.SH LIMITATIONS
.B git env sync
does not traverse submodules; environment files inside a submodule are
never synced, regardless of pattern configuration. The tool assumes a
single primary worktree per invocation and does not attempt to merge or
parse env file contents \(em files are copied as opaque bytes.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR git-env (1),
.BR git-worktree (1),
.BR git-config (1)
